# Controlling superparamagnetic particles with dynamic magnetic fields generated by a Helmholtz-coil system

Master Thesis for the degree of Master of Science in Physical Engineering at Faculty of Physics at the University of Lisbon. Written as a visiting student at the Faculty of Physics of the University of Leipzig.

The aim of this work was the creation of a novel system of magnetic tweezers which is surface free and makes possible the massive parallel measurement of macromolecule characteristics. The system is able to magnetically control superparamagnetic microparticles which control macromolecules, DNA strands or cells attached to them in a surface free environment, i.e. without the use of surfaces to which the objects are bond. This allows the system composed by a pair of beads and macromolecule to float freely in the solution, allowing parallel and inside cell measurements. The system constructed is composed of two pairs of water cooled Helmholtz coils controlled by an electronic circuit and software. The system is mounted on an inverted fluorescence microscope. The magnetic forces acting on different types of particles were calculated and fully simulated. This allowed the optimization of the coils’ parameters. In the
present document we explain the physical concepts behind the behavior of the magnetic particles, the details of the design, fabrication and specifications of the control system and at the end we show and discuss some qualitative experiments made with the system.

Keywords: magnetic tweezers, magnetic microparticles, superparamagnetism, helmholtz coil, digital electronic control, computerized control, cell manipulation, rheology. 

LabView 8.5
LabView 10
